All right, in this episode,
we're gonna be making an image gallery using CSS Grid,
and it's actually pretty nifty because
as wide as the image gallery gets,
you see that these items sort of just fit into each other
and that's using our grid autoflow dense that we have.
And then when you click on one of them,
it pops up a little overlay here,
and will show you the actual full image.
Just some of them are tiny little slivers.
You could click them and see the full version, so
let me talk about the idea behind this image gallery.
The idea is that, as we know, with CSS Grid,
not everything fits into each other perfectly.
You just can't throw a whole bunch of random sized things
and expect them all to fit in perfectly.
Let me open up inspect element here
and turn on our layout for grid.
This is our gallery here.
So what the idea behind this is that I'm making all of these
possible sizes, I'm making them all based on
a hundred pixel grid, so our grid is always gonna be
a hundred pixels by a hundred pixels,
and then each of these images is just going to span
a random amount, between one wide and four wide,
and one high and four wide.
You can see, sometimes they're tiny, one by one.
Sometimes, they're gonna be huge by going four by four.
And that's gonna be totally random,
but my idea is that by having a lot of these extra little
one by ones, like right here,
it's going to hopefully fill all of the gaps.
You can see it's not perfect, in this case,
there is one missing, 'cause maybe there wasn't enough,
but if I were to refresh this,
you see that it's actually starting to look pretty good
at the end, maybe we'll add a couple extra one by ones so
I like to think of these little ones as sort of filler,
and they will sort of fill up, so we'll add
a little bit more to fix those up,
so this is going to require a little bit of Javascript,
so options here, if you don't feel like writing Javascript,
you can just go into the finished version
and just copy paste all of the Javascript
and that will get you up and running,
but, I don't know, it's fun.
I think a lot of you will like to sort of
code along with it, so feel free to give this one a shot.
This one's a little bit more advanced, so
don't feel like you have to do this one all by yourselves.
You can start a code along with me.
Good, all right, let's kick it off,
just understanding what we're sort of starting with here
in our starter files.
First, we have an overlay, and that's going to be this ...
When you click on one of them, that's gonna be this
gray or black overlay.
And then inside of that, we have an overlay inner,
which has just two things, just a button to close it
and an image, a tag that is actually
going to be showing the image.
This isn't the most bulletproof image gallery ever made,
but it should give you a sort of a good head start
to making your own.
Then we also have our gallery which is going to be our grid,
that's this thing right here,
and there's nothing in it because I don't wanna manually
code all of these sizes by hand,
so we're actually gonna generate them with Javascript.
Similarly, in the image folder, I've just got a bunch
of 500 by 500 pixel images.
They're all gonna be 500 pixels wide,
and then we're going to be using the future of CSS,
called object fit, in order to make them fit perfectly,
sort of like background size cover,
if you've ever used that.
Let's keep going in the starter files,
what else do we got?
Some base CSS here.
I haven't imported that other base CSS in here.
This is just some stuff that we have.
I have styled the close button
and the actual overlay itself.
We'll go back into what that is,
but it's sort of the heavy lifting,
which is the grid right here.
Haven't done any of that with you,
as well as the sort of, the centering and the little
animation that we have going on here.
So, let's get it going.
The first thing we wanna do is actually generate
some gallery images, so let's go down to the
script tag here, and start writing some code.
We want to first select the gallery itself,
so we'll get the gallery, and then I also need the overlay
and these things are going to be very similar,
so I'll just say const gallery equals document
dot query selector, and we're gonna select something
with a class gallery and a class overlay.
And then inside the overlay, we also need the image itself
so that we can update it when you click it
and the close button, which is that, so we'll say
const overlay image is equal to overlay dot query selector.
We'll look inside of that for the image tag
and then we'll also look inside of it for the button.
Actually, we'll call this close, and that has a class
of close on it.
Good, now what we need is a sort of a little function here
that's going to generate some html for us
based on passed in widths and heights,
so again, the idea behind this is that it's going to ...
Between one and four width, or horizontal,
and one and four height, or vertical,
I'm gonna be calling it, and then in our CSS,
we're going to just assign, let me show you here
what it's actually looking like.
Whoa, firefox screenshots, whoa, this is not what I wanted.
Okay, hold on, right click, inspect element,
and if we open our gallery up, you see actually
what's being generated is that they all have a H,
like one, H four, H two, and each of those
H one, H four, H twos correspond with a different
span value, so this one has a H two, which means
that it's gonna horizontally span two on the column,
and then it has a V three, which means it's going to
vertically span the row three.
You get the point, right?
So here we'll make a function called
generate html, and that's going to take in a
horizontal and a vertical.
I've used destructuring there, if you're not sure
what that little thing was.
And then from that, we are gonna return
just some backtext that we have here
and that will give us a ... let's give ourselves a div,
and that div will have a class of item,
and then the H value that gets passed in,
oh, that's not pound, it's dollar sign
and the V with the V sign that we've passed in, good.
And then inside of that, we need image tag
with the source is going to be images forward slash ...
And we've got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, let's just use one dot jpeg for now,
and then we will also give an overlay item to this
and that's this little yellow spot that sort of comes up
from the bottom when you hover over top of it, so
that is going to be a div with the class of item
underscore, underscore overlay, I'm just using some
Bem here, and then inside of that,
we'll have a button that will say, "View".
And that button is going to trigger the actual opening
of the value that we have, good.
So we have this generate html function here.
Next up, I want to make a quick little helper function
that's gonna give us a random number
between one and something, so we'll say function,
random number,
and I'm gonna pass in sort of like an upper limit,
and from that, we're gonna return math dot four,
math dot random times the limit plus one.
And then what we can do up here
is swap out this one with the actual function
that we just made, which is random number.
I have 12 images, so it's gonna give us
between 1 and 12 dot jpeg.
Cool, and all right, let's go ahead and start making
a bunch of images, so I wanna do ...
Let's start with 50 images, and we can pop them
on the actual screen.
So what I like to do is, I need an array
of a bunch of arrays, meaning that I wanna just get
a bunch of things that are ... maybe the first one is
one wide and four high, and then maybe the next one is
two wide and two high, and maybe the next one is
three or four wide, and one high, right?
I basically just want a bunch of random arrays
where the first thing is going to be
how many columns it spans, and the second thing
is how many rows it's going to span.
So the way that I figured we could do that is
we'll just make a digits variable here
and we'll just make a empty array,
and the way that you can make an empty array
with the 50 blank spots is just using
the array dot from, and you pass it an object
that just has a length property on it.
Pretty neat little trick, oops.
Array dot from also takes a map function,
which will allow us to populate what goes into
each one of those, so what will go into each one
is a random number between one and four
and then another random number between one and four.
So let's just console dot log the digits
and see what we're dealing with.
Go to our console tab here, good.
So when we load the page, we are getting an array
of arrays, and we get 50 items, and each one has
two two, three four, four one, four two,
you get the point, right?
And this is great because this is just a bunch
of random things that we're then going to pass
into this generate html.
So what we need to do now is make an html variable,
so we'll say const html is equal to,
we'll take that digits array, and we'll map over
each one, and we'll simply just pass it to
this generate html.
So see what's going to happen is for each of these,
it's going to pass in the array one three,
and those are immediately going to be destructured
into the horizontal and the vertical values
and they're gonna be put into here.
So digits dot map, generate html,
we'll join it on the end, just so that it will
convert it to a string, and let's just console dot log
that html, see what we're dealing with.
Woohoo, look at this.
So we got a div with a class of item
and then every single one,
watch as I refresh the page, they're always
gonna be different, H four, H two, H one, H four, H four,
H four, seems like H four a lot, H one.
You get the point, right?
We're just generating a whole bunch of html,
and now what we can do is we can take our gallery,
which is this value that we've selected up here,
and we can just set the inner html
to be that html that we have.
And there we go, watch this, when the page loads,
we're going to get a whole bunch of random images
popping up, see, every time it loads,
this is going to be different random images,
and they all are gonna have different classes.
Good, so that's enough Javascript for now,
now let's get into the actual CSS of it,
so let's go into our gallery, and we'll display grid
on the actual grid, and again, we need to make it
100 pixels wide for each one.
Oh, somebody at my door, who's there?
Oh, no it was just motion, excuse me.
What were we doing?
Oh yeah, we're making a grid of 100 pixels,
so grid, template, columns, did this 100 times,
and how many do we need?
Well, we don't know, as many as it is wide.
So we can just repeat, autofill,
remember we learned about that, 100 pixels each one, good.
Give that a save and ooh, look what we're
working with so far.
If we inspect element, let's turn on our layout tools
for the gallery.
You can see that there's nine, but if it goes bigger,
10, 11, 12, each one is being slotted into the grid.
So that's our columns, our horizontal,
that we're working with, but we also need the vertical.
Now, the thing about the vertical is we don't know
how many there are going to be vertical,
so instead of explicitly telling it what the rows will be,
we'll just size the automatic rows that get created.
We'll size the implicit, or the auto rows.
So say grid, auto rows,
and that is going to be 100 pixels high.
All right, so now it looks like we're getting somewhere
with this actual grid, as I get bigger and bigger,
each one seems to be taking up,
but now they're also kind of spilling out,
so let's work on actually sizing them first,
so we'll take our base item and we ...
We actually don't need to tell it to by default span
one by one because that's the default of it.
But we'll say any item that has a V two on it,
meaning that it is spanning vertical two,
grid, row, span two.
And now you'll see, let's go and find one.
There's this one right here, the second one,
that was spanning two.
If I hover over top of it,
you'll see that it is now taking up two vertical spots.
You can't see the image taking up two spots.
That's 'cause the images are still spilling out
of each of them, maybe if we did something like this.
Item overflow hidden, maybe that will
work a little bit better, there we go, okay.
So you see that these ones right here
are being too high, and let's just keep going,
doing the rest, so anything that has a V three
is gonna be that, and anything that has four
is going to span four.
Beautiful.
Now let's do that with the horizontal versions as well,
let's see here.
Can we do a little bit of keyboard shortcuts?
Duplicate it all, select that, H ... whoo.
Did that work?
So this one has horizontal two,
oh no, obviously it's not gonna work
'cause it's grid row, not grid column,
so we'll say grid column.
A-ha, now we're getting somewhere.
So we've got all of our items,
they are all being sized appropriately.
The only problem is that we have all of these empty spaces
and that's because by default,
whenever it runs into a spot that it cannot fit,
and let's run through how this works.
That one fits, that one fits, that one fits,
that one fits, but then the next one,
which needs to be four horizontal and two high,
it doesn't fit right here because we only have
three wide and one high, so it just keeps going on
until it finds a spot, and that's here.
And then that space is forever going to be unused
because the browser does not go back to fill it.
So we know how we can fix that.
We'll go back up to our grid here, gallery,
and we'll say grid auto flow, and we'll call it dense.
And then it will start to fill it in
as we have these little one by one-ers,
it'll start to go back and fill in the values as we want,
so that's looking pretty good, but let's take a look.
We start to now have a bunch of little spots
because there just isn't enough of these little
filler one by ones that can fit itself in.
So the first time I did that, I was like aw,
that's kind of a bummer.
I don't know, maybe you could design something cool
that would fit in there, but
if this was like a Wordpress blog where you were having
a bunch of blogposts, what I would do,
and that's what we're gonna do here,
is we're gonna load it up with a bunch of extra
one by ones, so that they'll all fill themselves in
so let's go back to where we generated all this html
in our Javascript, and that was right here.
We're just going to concat an array,
and inside of that array, we're just gonna concat
a bunch of new arrays that are just one by ones,
so take that and doot, doot, doo, doo, doo, doo, doo.
All right, that looks good to me, that should be enough.
And let's see it load, I think I broke it.
Let's open up our dev tools here.
Array dot contact, what am I doing?
Concat, there we go.
Whoa, looking good.
Do we have any holes?
Let's see, looking good.
There's almost too many extras here,
maybe I'll refresh it a couple times.
Yeah, you know what, that's too many extra one by ones,
so in my case, I would ... you could probably also
write some sort of algorithm that would detect
empty holes and fill them as we need it.
There's a couple extra there at the bottom, couple.
Here, maybe I deleted too many.
I don't know, you get the point.
You can sort of play with it and see exactly ...
There, that's looking good to me.
Awesome, so that's the first part of it,
but now we need to write some more CSS
to actually get them clickable
and have this sort of overlay pop-up.
So if you're happy with this,
you can stop this video now and move onto the next one,
but if you'd rather learn a little bit more CSS
and Javascript, then let's keep on trucking.
All right, let's first start, if we look at this here,
let's start with these little overlays,
and also, these images are much better cropped
than they are here, you see here, they're just taking
the top right hand corner of the image
and the rest is spilling out, so we're actually gonna make
each of these individual items a grid as well,
so scroll to your item selector,
and we are going to display grid on it,
and we're just going to make it a one by one grid,
so I'll explain this in a second.
So grid, template, column one,
and grid, template, rows, one.
And what that should do, if I now go and
go to the layout tab and take one of the first ones
and inspect it, it's just a one by one grid
and the reason why I do that is because
CSS Grid is also really good for overlapping elements.
Instead of us using position absolute
in order to overlap our items on top of here,
'cause this yellow little item details,
that needs to be overlapped on top of the image,
so if that was the case, then I'd either have to
make the details or the image, or both of them,
position absolute, and I don't wanna have to do that.
And I'm gonna show you how to do it exactly with
just using CSS grid.
So we'll take our item, let's do the image first,
and we're going to say grid, column, one, negative one,
so span across the entire thing
and the row, also span across the entire thing,
and then we're gonna give the image a width of 100%,
a height of 100%, and now this starts to ...
Oh, this is the wrong one, that's the answer.
Here we go, this is what we're working with.
You see that these images are now being stretched,
so what we can do to that is give ourselves
and object fit, and call it cover,
and that will just, it's sort of like background size cover
where it will trim the left or the top or the bottom
or the left and the right to make sure that it fits
perfectly inside of it, while still showing
as much of the image as we can.
We also have contain in there as well,
but that's not what we're looking for,
'cause that would show the entire image.
So background size cover does work
with the ability to do spanning across, one to one,
but you do also need this 100%, 100%
in order for that to work properly.
Good, then the details, the item overlay,
let's grab that, so the item overlay.
And I'm just gonna say background red.
And you see that the item overlay is sort of
below the actual item, and we want it to overlap
on top of this image, so we're just gonna take this
grid column and grid row details
and put it on the item overlay as well.
And this is something we have not done
in our previous one, and that is the ability
to overlap items on top of each other
if you place them on the same row and column,
they will just overlap each other,
and then Z index comes into play,
and if i wanted this to ... I think I can do
position rel, Z index two,
and that would put the image on top,
but because of source order in html,
the overlay is just fine, so the background red here.
Oh, gotta get rid of this position rel stuff,
that's why that didn't go away.
So we don't actually want background red.
I want my yellow, specific yellow, which is that,
and I'm going to put 32, which is 70% opaque.
This is RRGGBBAA, and that 32 is Hex
for 70% transparent.
Good, I'm happy with that,
let's do position relative on this.
And let's add a little bit of padding, 10 PX,
good, now I want to totally center this button
in the middle, so how can I center something
in the middle?
Actually we don't need this padding
because we're gonna center it,
so let's do display grid on the actual item there,
and you see by default, what is the align items
and justify item?
It's stretch.
So the entire thing ... this actually looks kind of cool.
The entire thing is a button now, which is crazy,
but we want it to just go in the middle, so
we say justify items, and that is the x axis
on the row, and we'll say center,
and that will put the button in the middle of each of them,
and align items, that is along the y axis,
that will center it perfectly for us, good.
Let's also just say item, overlay button,
I realize I'm mixing my Bem and my selector,
so forgive me.
Let's say background none,
border two pixels solid white,
color white, text transform uppercase,
background, let's do a little RGBA values here.
Looking pretty good, maybe a little padding on that.
Five pixels, cool, so we have that.
Now I also want to slide it down,
and the way that we can slide something totally
outside of the item is by using transform.
So we'll go back up to our overlay here,
we'll say transform,
translate y 100%, actually just do 50%,
so you can see what's actually happening here.
50% will bring it down, obviously halfway,
so 100% will bring it just off the actual item.
And then what we can do is say when the item is
hovered, then the item overlay is going to be a transform
of translate Y zero, we'll bring it back to where we are.
So now when I hover over top of it,
they automatically show up,
and if I would like, I can go up to my overlay
and put a transition
zero point five seconds, or something like that,
and that will animate it up, that's too slow.
Zero point two seconds.
Whoo, all right, we're in business now.
I think that's all the CSS we have for overlapping
and overlaying things on it.
Now let's go down to the script tags
and write a little bit of Javascript
so when somebody clicks one of these items,
we can then show the overlay.
So gonna go down here and the reason why I'm going to
select these elements after they've been created
is because otherwise, I have to get into event delegation,
and I've got videos on that in my Javascript 30,
but I'm not gonna do it here.
So I'll say const items is equal to document
dot query selector all dot item.
Then we'll take each of the items,
and we'll loop over it, and we'll say
for each item, item dot add event listener,
we're gonna listen for a click,
and then when that happens, we're going to handle
the click, so we need to make a function
called handle click.
Let's do that up here.
Function handle click, takes in the event
and let's just console log the event dot current target.
So open up dev tools here, go to our console,
and now when you click on an item,
we'll see that specific item that we have.
Now inside of that, we need a couple things.
First we need the actual source of the image,
so if we click on the item,
we want the image one dot jpeg,
so in here, we'll say const SRC is equal to E
dot current target dot query selector,
we'll look inside of that for the image tag,
and then we'll grab the source attribute right
off of that image tag, so
we have the image, we look for the image ...
Sorry, we have the item,
we look for the image tag, and then we grab the
source attribute right off of that,
and I can console log the source now.
Top of that, so see.
Beautiful, I'm getting all of my jpegs,
now we can take our overlay image
and set the source of that to be
the source that we just pulled, and
what is the overlay image?
That is, we scroll to the top here,
that is this empty image that currently
does not have a source, but will also be showing it.
Good, I'm happy with that.
Now the last thing we wanna do is
have the ability to open the entire overlay.
And you'll see that if the overlay has a class of open,
it is display gridded.
Otherwise, it is display none-d.
That's what I've done here.
So we will make another function called open.
And in that function it'll just say overlay dot class list
dot add, open.
And we'll make a function called close,
which will do the opposite of this.
Good, then inside of this handle click,
we'll just simply say open,
actually, we don't need an entire open function for this.
Let's just put this in here, good.
Then, when I click it,
whoa, looking good-ish.
So that did pop it up for us.
Seems like that image is a little bit big.
The close button doesn't work, so let's wire up
that close button first, and we'll figure out
what's going on with the CSS here.
So we'll say overlay close dot add event listener,
click, and when someone clicks it, we're gonna
run the close function.
Open it up, click the close, nope, not working.
Any errors?
Go to our console, class list dot close.
What am I doing?
Do I even know?
Remove, you're probably screaming at me.
There we go, open it up,
close works just beautifully.
You can also hook that function up to run
when somebody hits the escape key.
We've done that a couple times in my Javascript 30.
So view that, good, and let's just take a quick look at
what's going on with this overlay.
Over, overlay inner ...
Let's take a look at my CSS.
Oh, it's 'cause I had a figure.
Gonna change this to overlay inner instead.
Beautiful, one other thing is it's actually not centered
here, so what we can do is go back to our overlay
and go say when it is open,
we're gonna display grid, and then we're just gonna say
align items center, and justify items center.
You see how we do that quite a bit?
Open it up, whoo, look at that, beautiful.
I can't see the close button anymore, so
go up to our dot close selector and color should be black.
View, beautiful, looking good to me.
I'm a big fan of that.
Cool, so that is our very simple CSS grid
image gallery using object fit dense.
Hopefully you learned a few things.
I especially liked the overlapping part.
I use that a lot with CSS Grid to overlap items
on top of it.
Good job, I'll see you in the next one.